Akshay, welcome to Talk Python To Me. Awesome to have you here.
Thanks, Michael. Really happy to be here.
Yeah. It's data science hour, isn't it?
Yeah, I guess it is.
In a sense, but also in a sense kind of bringing data science a little closer to traditional formal computer science or more, I don't know.
I don't know what to think about computer science. Software engineering.
Software engineering. Yeah, that's our goal. Blending data science with sort of the rigor of reproducibility of software engineering.
Yeah. And I think people are going to find it pretty interesting. It's definitely gained a lot of traction lately.
So it's going to be really fun to dive into Marimo. Before we do, though, who are you? What are you doing here? Tell people about yourself.
Sure. So I'm Akshay. I'm one of the co-founders and developers of Marimo.
I started working on Marimo a few years ago, I guess, a little over two years ago, right after I finished a PhD at Stanford where I was working on machine learning research.
And before that, I was at Google Brain where I worked on TensorFlow.
And I guess for the past several years, I've been wearing different hats, either a computer systems hat where I build open source software and domain specific languages for people who do machine learning or I just do machine learning.
And for the past few years, it's been the first hat. So working on the Marimo notebook, which is our attempt to blend the best parts of interactive computing with the reusability and reproducibility of regular Python software.
Well, that's very cool. You've been right at the cutting edge of this whole machine learning thing, I guess, right?
If you go back a handful of years, it's different today than it was five years ago.
Oh, yeah, it's very different. I was at Google Brain 2017 to 2018.
So I think we had Transformers, but we didn't really appreciate all that they could do.
Yeah.
But it was a really exciting time to be at Google Brain where it was pure research, just like one that you could just work on anything that you wanted to work on.
And I was an engineer there on a small sub team inside of TensorFlow where we were working on TensorFlow 2, which is sort of making TensorFlow more like PyTorch crudely.
And that was a lot of fun, but yeah, got to go to like a bunch of talks by researchers and it was a special time for sure.
Yeah, I bet it was.
Well, you know, that's such an interesting background.
I think maybe give people a sense of what is Google Brain and all that and maybe just Transformers, right?
It's the foundation of so much surprising and unexpected tech these days.
Yeah, yeah, I'm happy to.
So Google Brain, what is Google Brain?
So I guess technically Google Brain no longer exists as it did back then.
Now it's just DeepMind with DeepMind and Google Brain merged.
But back then, Google Brain was, so there was, I guess, two research orders under the alphabet umbrella, Google Brain and DeepMind.
And Google Brain was a place where it was really special.
There were folks working on all kinds of research projects from you, like using Transformers for code generation, but also like systems research projects.
Like I was there when the Jack's machine learning library, which is an alternative to TensorFlow and PyTorch, was still being in the early days of development.
And I was able to meet with like Roy Frostig, Matt Johnson.
And that was really cool sort of coming up to speed on machine learning systems in that era.
I was only there for a year because I decided I wanted to go back and do a PhD myself in machine learning research where I used actually TensorFlow and PyTorch to work on new sort of like machine learning modules.
Did you feel bad when you used PyTorch?
You're like, oh, I'm cheating.
No, no.
I mean, a little, I guess.
But, you know, it's the thing like everyone else used PyTorch.
And we had just started working on TensorFlow 2 when I joined, whereas PyTorch had already been mature.
So it was the responsible thing to do, I think.
And Transformers, what are these Transformer things?
They came out of Google, right?
Yeah, yeah, they did.
Attention is all you need.
These Transformer things, I guess, are the backbone of all these large language models that we're seeing today.
And they proved to have like an incredible capacity for modeling, I guess, in a generative way, all kinds of text.
And in a way that, honestly, if I had to admit, like surprised me.
Like at the time in 27 to 18, like we were doing good work in like machine translation and stuff.
But even back then, you know, there was researchers who were working on at Google Brain, like, you know, code generation, like writing a bunch of unit tests, stuff that people do regularly today, actually, with large language models.
I put on my systems engineer hat back then, and I was a little skeptical, to be honest.
And I've just totally proved wrong.
And I'm happy to have been proved wrong.
So it's been phenomenal seeing sort of that, the success of that particular model.
And yeah, having played a small part in it.
Yeah, I've been a long time skeptic of machine learning in the sense that for so long, it was kind of like fusion.
It's going to be amazing, but it's 10, 20, 30 years out.
And maybe, you know, and it was all almost like knowledge, knowledge-based type things.
And just, I mean, it was interesting, it looked kind of relevant and possibly useful in some of the cases, but not like it is today.
Like today, people don't even care about technology, are blown away by this stuff, and they use it all day long.
And it's gone so much farther and so much faster than I expected it to.
I'm all about it these days.
I use, I still write most of my code, but anytime there's something tricky, instead of going to Google and hunting through Stack Overflow, let's see what chat says about it or something like that.
And then maybe we'll go to Google if we don't get a good answer, you know?
Yeah, no, no, I'm the same way.
I spent more time than I care to admit last night migrating from Vim to NeoVim, and I know I'm late to the party, but perplexity and other tools just made it a lot easier to start from scratch installation without bringing over my VimRC.
And you can ask it detailed questions, right?
For example, I needed some way to reset the initial offset in DaVinci Resolve timelines.
It was, okay, well, here's your four options, and these are the way you can do it, and these are the tradeoffs.
It's not just you might get an, you know, here is the switch, but you get an analysis.
And I'm pretty impressive.
So the reason I'm going into this is I want to ask you, having been on the inside at the early days,
what is your perspective of seeing this trajectory, or trajectory is the way I should put it, you know, upwards, not logarithmic?
Yeah.
I guess what I will say is I think one thing that's, like, really changed, like, so back when I was at Brain,
even though models were advanced, like, I felt like in order to use machine learning well,
you really did need to be somewhat trained in machine learning.
You know, like, it was important to understand what a loss function, like, basic things, like, what a loss function was,
what's training, what's validation.
These days, like, you don't need to, like, at all, actually.
I think I especially didn't use LLMs, right?
Like, you just need to know inputs and outputs.
It's like a function call that sort of has fuzzy outputs.
You know, it's a mathematical function, in quotes.
Yeah.
So I think, like, that's, like, one thing that's, like, totally, I guess it kind of shows that artificial intelligence is transitioning more from, I guess, like, a science to a technology,
and that tool that people can just, like, readily use without really needing to understand how it works.
As for the trajectory, I've been bad at making predictions in the past.
I think I would be bad at predicting anything right now.
Surely, these models are, you know, very good for coding, for massaging, marketing, copy, and, like, you know, I do, like, random tasks where, like, I have a bio I wrote in first person,
and someone asks for it in third person, and I'm too lazy to change, and I just give it to a chat model.
Yeah.
But if you ask for a trajectory of AGI or ASI, which I don't even remember what the S stands for these days,
but I'm not sure I can predict anything on those timelines.
Yeah.
I hear you.
I'm with you on the prediction.
But I would say that the adoption and effectiveness of it has far outpaced what I would have guessed five years ago.
Yeah.
I mean, even local models, like, it's kind of exciting, like, what you can just run on your MacBook.
I also didn't really anticipate that.
Yeah.
All right.
I don't want to make this the AI show because it's not about AI, but your background is so interesting.
So when you were working initially on Transformers, did you, as a group, not you individually,
you guys perceive the need for the scale of the computation?
Like, you know, to train GPT-01, I don't know how much compute was involved,
but probably more than cities use in terms of energy sometimes.
You know what I mean?
It was a lot.
So how much compute were you all using back then versus now, I guess is what I'm getting at.
So I guess, yeah, and I think you kind of said it, but just to clarify or to make it clear,
that I personally didn't work on Transformers.
I was working on TensorFlow.
So, yeah, the, I guess, embedded DSL for training machine learning models that was used within Google.
I'm still used today.
I can't give you specific numbers, to be honest, because I was pretty deep in the systems part of working on TensorFlow and not paying too much attention for, like, standing up distributed clusters.
Like, I did things like, you know, adding support to TensorFlow for, like, creating, like, a function library.
TensorFlow is like a Dataflow graph engine, and it didn't have functions in it.
So I added support for functions, partitioning functions over devices.
But other teams used that work to go and train the big models.
I know it was a lot of compute, but I, a lot versus a lot, you know, all caps versus, you know, just capital case.
Yeah, I'm sure there's a delta.
I just, I don't know how much.
Yeah.
Well, today they're all talking about restarting nuclear reactors and plugging them straight to the data center.
So it's a weird time.
Let's go back, maybe a little bit before then.
2012 or so, I believe, is maybe the right time frame.
And let's talk about notebooks.
And, you know, around then, Jupyter notebooks burst on the scene.
And I think they fundamentally changed the ecosystem of Python and basically scientific work in general, right?
There's, I mean, by changing Python, I mean, there are so many people in Python who are here because they got pulled into a notebook.
They wrote a little bit of code.
They got incredible results.
They were never, ever a programmer, but now they're the maintainer of an open source project or something like that.
You know what I mean?
They're just like, oh, this is kind of neat.
Oh, I'll create a biology library or whatever.
And then all of a sudden, you know, they're deep in it.
And so Jupyter, I think, was really the start of that.
Maybe there was some precursors that I'm not familiar with.
Yeah, Jupyter was essentially the start of it, especially for Python.
Like, I think the idea of computation on, yeah, notebooks has been around.
But, yeah, the IPython REPL, I guess the IPython project with the IPython REPL, I think, was early 2000s.
And Jupyter, I think you're right, like 2012-ish, as he's burst onto the scene with putting the IPython REPL into a web browser with multiple REPL cells.
And all of a sudden, you could do more than what you could do in the console.
And also made it a lot more accessible.
Yeah.
Going back to that sixth cell you entered on your REPL and editing it, that is not a way to draw beginners in.
No, definitely not.
Up arrow key six times, no.
Yeah, 2012, coincidentally, is when I started college as an undergrad.
So I had been using, I kind of grew up, as long as I used Python, I think I probably was using Jupyter Notebooks.
And I even started using Google CoLab before it was made public, because when I was interning at Google.
And I think the year I started working at Google full-time is when they made it public to the world.
So, yeah, notebooks have sort of shaped the way that I think and interact with code quite a bit.
Yeah, absolutely.
So maybe you could give us some perspective.
It sounds like you were there, like, right at the right time.
You know, what was the goal and sort of the job of Jupyter Notebooks and those kinds of things then?
And how has that changed now?
And maybe how does it still solve that problem or not solve it so much?
Yeah, I think, I think, so, so stepping back.
So you mentioned, like, how many people who might not have traditionally, you know, worked with code sort of came into it because of Jupyter Notebooks.
And I think that's, like, really, I think you're onto something there.
I think that's correct.
And I think the special thing about Notebooks is that they, like, mix code and visuals and, like, narrative text in, like, this interactive programming environment.
And that interactivity in particular, I think, is really important for anyone who works with data.
It's where you've got to, like, first, like, you know, run some queries against your data to see the general shape of it.
You know, run some transformations to see, like, you know, basically, like, explore your data.
Like, hold it in your hands, right?
And, like, you know, repls before and then Jupyter Notebooks in particular lets you do that in a way that you just can't easily do in a script because it holds the variables in memory.
And so I think the role that it played was that it enabled data scientists or computational scientists, biologists, astrophysicists, all these different types of people who work with data.
It let them rapidly experiment with code and models and, importantly, get some kind of, like, artifact out of it.
And in particular, this was, like, a static HTML-type artifact, right, where you have some text documenting what experiments you're running.
You have Python code and then you have, like, matplotlib plots and other artifacts.
And I think for, you know, for the sciences in particular early on, that was super important and transformative.
And we were talking about other computational notebook environments.
And it's interesting to mention this because, like, things like this existed sort of before, like, Mathematica's, like, workbooks, I think they called them.
I might have done that wrong.
But I think just, like, the open-source nature of Python and the accessibility of it just, like, made it way easier to get started.
And also the fact that it was, like, browser-based, right, so that, like, you can easily share, like, these, the HTML artifacts that come out, I think was really transformative.
And insofar as, like, what they're used for today, they're used for a lot.
It's kind of remarkable how much they're used.
Like, I remember seeing a statistic for Google Colab alone, which is just one particular hosted version of a Jupyter notebook.
And it was two years ago.
And they said something about, like, having 10 million monthly active users.
And so the number of people who use Jupyter on a monthly basis is surely larger than that.
Oh, yeah.
And they're used for the sciences, but they're also used for, like, things where you want, like, the traditional rigor and reproducibility of software engineering.
So they're increasingly used for, like, data pipelines and, like, ETL jobs.
And, like, so anyone who's in Databricks, for example, runs, like, they call them workflows, Databricks workflows, through essentially Jupyter notebooks.
They're used for training machine learning models.
Like, I've trained many models in a Jupyter notebook.
I've developed algorithms in Jupyter notebooks.
I've produced scientific figures that go straight into my paper from a Jupyter notebook.
And the reason people do this is because, again, the interactivity and, like, the visuals that come out is very liberating compared to using a script.
But they also have...
I think there's also a developing understanding that happens from them.
Because when you're writing just a straight program, you're like, okay, this step, this step, this step, this step, and then we get the answer.
Whereas notebooks, it's like step one, step two.
Let me look at it.
Oh, maybe that's different.
Let me go back and change...
It's more iterative from an exploratory perspective.
Yeah.
I think that's exactly right.
Because you have that, like, that, you know, when you're writing, like, a software system, you kind of know the state of the system.
You know what you want to change it to.
But when you're working with data, there's that unknown, what will my algorithm do to my data?
You just have to run it to find out.
Yeah, absolutely.
And graphs and tables and iterative stuff like that is really nice.
So why create something instead of Jupyter?
Right?
Why is Jupyter not enough for the world?
Yeah.
I think there's a...
So just, you know, you're the creator of Marimo, along with the rest of the team and so on.
But yeah, it's like, why create this thing when Jupyter exists?
Yeah.
So I think there's quite a few reasons.
So Jupyter notebooks are, like, I guess, more like Jupyter notebooks powered by the IPython kernel, just to put a finger on it.
Right.
Because it could be different.
It could be like a C++ kernel or .NET kernel or whatever.
Yeah.
Yeah, exactly.
But this particular form of notebooks where, like, where you get a page and then in the front end shows you a bunch of cells that you execute one at a time imperatively.
Even though, like, you have a sequence of cells, it still is essentially a REPL.
And, like, it's...
The onus falls on the developer, the scientist, whoever's using it, to, like, run each cell on their own and, like, maintain the state of their kernel.
So, like, you run a cell, say you have three cells, you know, you decide to go rerun the second cell.
You have to remember to rerun whatever cell.
Depends on it.
Maybe it's the third cell.
Maybe it's the first cell because you wrote things out of order.
And so you can easily get into a state with Jupyter notebooks where your code on the page doesn't match the outputs that were created.
Yeah.
So if you were to, like, basically go to the menu option and say rerun all cells, you would get different answers.
Exactly.
And this is, like, it's actually been studied.
And, like, it happens a kind of a shockingly large amount of times that, like...
So there's one study in 2019 by Pimentel.
I'm going to probably pronounce his name wrong.
But by, I think, four professors.
And they studied a bunch of notebooks on GitHub.
And they found that only, like, a quarter of the notebooks that were on GitHub, they were able to run it all.
And then, like, either 4% of those or 4% of all of them.
Only 4% of them, like, when they ran, recreated the same results that were serialized in the notebook.
Meaning, like, maybe people ran cells out of order when they originally created the notebook and then committed it.
Or maybe they didn't, like, create a requirements.txt that faithfully captured the package environment they used.
So there's, like, this recognition that Jupyter Notebooks suffer from a reproducibility crisis.
Which is rather unfortunate for a tool that is used for science and data science and data engineering.
Like, things where reproducibility is paramount.
Yeah.
And so that was one issue.
Reproducibility was, like, one main thing that, sort of, we wanted to solve for with Marima Notebooks.
And the other thing, I think, that we alluded to earlier is that...
So Jupyter Notebooks are stored as, like, a JSON file.
Where, like, the outputs, like, the plots, etc.
Are serialized as these binary strings.
And, like, the, you know, one downside of that is that you can't really use these things.
Like, you can use, like, traditional software.
At least not without jumping through extra hoops.
So, like, you make a small change to your Jupyter Notebook.
You get a gigantic git diff.
Because, you know, the binary representation of some object changed by a large amount.
Or you want to reuse the Python code in that Jupyter Notebook.
When you have to run it through, like, a Jupytext or some other thing to strip it out.
And then so you...
Oftentimes you get this, like, situation where people just, like, end up copy-pasting a bunch of things across a bunch of notebooks.
And it quickly gets really messy.
And that was another thing we wanted to solve for.
Making notebooks, like, git-friendly and interoperable with other Python tooling, like git, pytest, etc.
Yeah, there's some things that will run them, kind of, function module-like.
But, yeah, it's not really the intended use case, is it?
Yeah, it's not.
But people want to.
Which is, I think, like, the...
It's funny, because, like, the intended use case, I think, of, like, traditional notebooks like Jupyter was, like...
Interactive REPL Explorer data produced, like, simple narrative text.
But then, like, they just got used for so much more than that in situations, yeah, where reproducibility, reusability is, like, really important.
And I think that's what we're trying to solve for.
Yeah, it sounds great.
It looks like you've done quite well.
We'll dive into the features and stuff.
But just wondering out loud, you know, that study.
I know it was not your study, so I'm not asking you for answers.
Just, what do you think?
If it's that low of a percentage of reproducibility, because people fell down on their, like, rigorous software engineering, for example, like, no requirements file, or hard-coded pass instead of relative pass, or whatever.
If it's that number for notebooks, I wonder about just plain Python files that are also meant to act to solve, like, science problems and stuff that just didn't happen to be in notebooks.
You know, I wonder if they're any better.
Yeah.
It's a good question.
I think they will be better.
I can just give an anecdote to, like, why I think they would be better.
And so, like, so one example, and this happened to me many times, but, like, one particular example is, like, when I was working on my PhD thesis, which was about vector embeddings, it was me and a couple of co-authors.
And, you know, both of us did our, like, created the examples for this embedding algorithm in, like, Jupyter notebooks.
And these notebooks produced a bunch of plots, et cetera.
And so at the end of the, once the thesis was written, I was putting up all our code on GitHub.
And so I asked one of my co-authors, like, hey, like, can you share your notebooks with me?
And this co-author is amazing.
He's really smart, but not necessarily trained as a software engineer.
And he shares his Jupyter notebook with me.
And I run it.
And it doesn't work at all.
And the reason it doesn't work at all is that there's, like, multiple cells.
And there's, like, this branching path where, like, it's clear that, like, he ran, like, you know, you see the execution order serialized in the notebook.
And it's not, like, one, two, three, four.
It's, like, one, two, seven, four, three.
It's, like, these cells were ran in this path-dependent way.
And then also it's, like, there's, like, three cells in the middle.
He ran just one of them.
I'm not exactly sure which one.
And, like, whereas if you had a Python script, there's only one way to, I mean, sure, you can have data.
That's a good point.
You do not really get a choice.
It runs top to bottom.
Exactly.
Depending on the data.
Okay.
So, yeah, that is something that's really, it's just very counter to the concept of reproducibility is that you can run them in any order.
And there's not, you know, I feel like, I feel like Jupyter Notebooks should almost have, like, a red bar at the cross, like, an out-of-order bar warning across the top if it's not top to bottom.
It doesn't have to be one, two, three.
It could be one, five, six, nine.
But it should be a monotonic increasing function as you read the numbers top to bottom.
Yeah.
Otherwise, it should be, like, a big warning or, like, a weird, like, some kind of indicator, like, hey, you're in the danger zone.
You know what I mean?
Yeah, and there's actually another thing that actually happens, has happened to me way more often than I care, I should care to admit while working with Jupyter Notebooks is that, like, it's not just the order you run the cells.
It's also, like, what happens if you delete a cell?
Because when you delete a cell, you no longer, so say a cell declares a variable X, and you deleted that cell, you're like, yeah, I don't want X anymore.
But you may forget that just by deleting the cell, you're not removing the variables from memory, and so, like, X still exists.
And so then you're running other cells that depend on X, everything is fine.
But then you come back, and you run your notebook, and everything's broken.
And, like, you don't, you have no idea.
The first time this happened to me, it took me forever to debug.
And later on, you realize that.
I can imagine that is so rough.
Yeah.
Later on, you realize, okay, this is a pattern that happens.
But it's like a, yeah, so that's another thing that we also wanted to solve for in Marimo notebooks.
Awesome.
All right.
Well, tell us about Marimo.
Okay.
So let's see.
So Marimo is, it's an open source notebook for Python.
The main thing that's different between Marimo and Jupyter is that Marimo's reactive.
And what that means is that, unlike a Jupyter notebook where you can run cells in any arbitrary order you like,
in Marimo, when you run one cell, it knows what other cells need to be run in order to make sure that your code and outputs are synchronized.
So it's kind of like Excel, right?
So you have two cells.
One declares X.
Another one references X.
You run the cell that declares X or defines X.
All other cells that reference X will automatically run or they'll be marked as stale.
You can, like, configure it if you're scared of automatic execution.
But the point is that it, like, manages your variables for you so that you don't have to worry about outputs becoming, like, decohered from your code.
And similarly, if you delete a cell, the variable will be scrubbed from memory.
And then cells that are dependent on it will either be marked as stale with a big warning or automatically run and invalidated.
So that reactivity provides, like, some amount of reproducibility.
And then it also, some other key features, and then we can, like, dive into each of them, is an additional reactivity.
Marimo notebooks are stored as pure Python files, which makes them easy to version with Git.
And then we've also made it easy to run Marimo notebooks as Python scripts and then share them as interactive web apps with, like, little UI elements.
Yeah, I'm excited to talk about that.
That's some cool stuff there.
Okay, so when you create a variable, if you say, like, x equals 1, it's not just a pi long pointer in memory, right?
It's something that kind of looks at the read and write that get in the set of it and creates, like, a relationship where it says,
if you were to push the change into it, it says, okay, I have been changed.
Who else is interested in reading from me?
And it can sort of work that out, right?
How does that work?
Actually, it's not really implemented in that way.
Okay.
So, okay.
So, let's see.
Yeah, this is interesting to dive into because there's, like, two ways that you can, like, get at reactivity.
So, in Marimo, what we actually do is we do static analysis.
So, we look for definitions and references on, like, of global variables.
And then so, we just make a graph out of that.
So, for every cell, we look at the, I guess, the loads in the ASTs and then, like, the assignments.
And so, we can see statically who declares what and who reads what, like, who is a cell.
And so, that makes it, like, performant and also predictable of, like, how your notebook is going to run.
An alternative, I think, what you were getting at was, like, runtime tracing.
More like a JavaScript front-end sort of deal, like a view binding, model binding type thing or something like that.
Yeah, so, yeah, everything we do is static, is done with static analysis.
There was another project called IPyFlow, which was, like, a reactive kernel for Jupyter.
It's still around.
They took, like, the runtime tracing approach of, like, checking on every assignment.
Like, okay, there's a read.
Now, where is that object in memory and then running cells that depend on it?
I think in practice, you know, I was talking to Stephen Mackey, the author of that extension.
And then also, like, based on some work that I saw at Google TensorFlow, like, that's, like, really hard to get 100% right.
It's basically impossible to get 100% right.
So, like, you will miss some, like, low references and definitions.
And so, like, there's this weird usability cliff as a user where, like, when you run a cell, you're not sure what else will run.
Whereas if you do it based on static analysis, you can give guarantees on what will run and what won't.
Yeah, I guess the static analysis is a good choice because there's only so many cells.
You don't have to track it down to, like, well, within the DOM and all the JavaScript objects, we're linking all these together and they can do whatever they want from all these different angles.
It's just, like, when this cell runs, what other cells do we need to think about?
So it's kind of, like, what does this create?
What does it change?
And then push that along, right?
So it's a little more constrained.
Exactly, yeah.
So basically, yeah, that's exactly right.
And so it's a data flow graph where the data flowing on the edges is the variables across cells.
Yeah.
And I don't know.
I think I've been thinking about data flow graphs for a long time, ever since TensorFlow, during my PhD too, when I worked on CVXPY.
So it's just a thing that I enjoy thinking about and working on.
Yeah.
So what about your experience working on TensorFlow and at Google and at Stanford and stuff that sort of influenced this project?
Yeah, a couple of things.
So definitely a big thing that influenced this project was, like, working as a scientist at Stanford where, like, I and my colleagues use Jupyter Notebooks, like, on almost a daily basis because they let us see our data while we worked on it.
And so really valued the iterative programming environment.
Really didn't like all the bugs that we kept on running into, which are, like, kind of our fault, right, because of, like, oh, we forget to run a cell, et cetera.
Didn't like that it was not easy to reuse the code in a notebook in just other Python modules.
Didn't like that I couldn't share my artifacts in a meaningful way with my PhD advisor who can't run Python notebooks.
Like, I couldn't, like, make a little app to showcase my research project.
It's so interesting how PhD advisors and just professors in general, how they're either embracing or their inability to embrace or their prejudices for or against the technology so influence science, the people in the research teams, everything.
It's like, well, we'd like to use this, but the principal author really doesn't like it, doesn't want to run it, so we're not using that.
Or, you know, just these little edge cases.
Like, I was made to learn Fortran in college.
I'm still sour about it.
That's funny.
Yeah, no, it's true.
Yeah, it does have a big effect.
And then at Google, I guess the things that influenced, so we used Notebooks 2 there.
Since I was doing the systems engineering work at Google, I personally didn't use them too much, although I did use, like, Google Colab for, like, training, like, creating training courses and stuff for, like, other engineers and for demos.
But I guess the part of Google that influenced it was just, like, thinking about data flow graphs for a year and, you know, we were – there was, like, a couple of parable projects, like, one that was using runtime tracing for, like, figuring out, like, how to make a DAG.
And it was just, I don't know, kind of traumatic just because, like, you miss things and the user experience just, like, it kind of falls over.
And so I guess the part from there was it just made me not want to use runtime tracing.
It made me embrace static analysis for this.
Yeah.
Yeah, it makes a lot of sense.
All right.
Well, let's talk some features here.
What are the – I guess probably the premier feature is the reactivity, in which case it doesn't matter which cell you run, they're never going to get out of date, right?
Yeah, that's correct.
So the reactivity, in other words, the data flow graph behind it, is the premier feature.
And it lets you reason about your code locally, right, which is really nice.
Like, you can just look at your one cell.
You don't really have to worry about – you know what variables it reads and what it defines.
And you don't have to worry about, oh, but what cells do I need to run before this?
So not only does it, like, make sure your code and outputs are in sync, it also, like, makes it really, like, fun and useful.
Like, it makes it possible to, like, really rapidly experiment with, like, ideas.
As long as, like, your cells aren't too expensive, if you enable automatic execution, then you can change a parameter, run a particular cell.
And it'll run only, you know, what's required to, like, update, like, subsequent outputs.
And then another, like, consequence of reactivity that I think is really neat and our users really like is it makes it far easier to use interactive, like, UI widgets than it is in, like, a Jupyter notebook.
And the way that this works is that – so Marimo is, like, both a notebook and also a library.
So you can import Marimo as Mo into your notebook.
And when you do this, you get access to a bunch of things, including these – a bunch of different UI widgets,
ranging from the simple ones, like sliders, drop-down menus, to, like, cooler ones, like interactive selectable charts and, like, data frame transformers that, like, automatically generate the Python code needed for your transformation.
And the way that reactivity comes into here is that, like, because we know which – when you create a UI element, as long as you bind it to a global variable,
just say, you know, my slider equals mo.ui.slider, then when you interact with the slider anywhere on the screen,
well, we can just say, okay, that slider's bound to X.
We just need to run all other cells that depend on X.
And all of a sudden, you have really nice interactivity, interactive elements controlling your code execution without ever having to write a callback.
And so I think people find that really liberating, too.
So you don't really have to hit backspace, change it, you know, a character value for your variable, shift, enter, shift, enter, shift, enter.
You know, just change a number and everything automatically recalculates.
Yeah.
And this dependency flow, is it possible to have a cyclical graph?
Like, if I did this in Jupyter, I could go – I could go down to the third cell and define X and then go back up and then use X.
If I run it in the right order, it won't know that there's a problem.
Imagine it's only possible to go one way, right?
You can't get into a weird cycle?
Yeah.
So we do give people escape hatches.
We ask them, please don't use it unless you really know what you're doing and you really want to do this.
Because in most cases, we find, especially for, like, if your goal is to just, like, work with data as a data scientist, data engineer scientist, we feel you don't need that cycles.
You don't need cycles.
But if you're making an app, and I guess I should mention, Marimo lets you run any notebook as – well, a notebook, but also from the command line, you can serve your notebook as a web app, like, similar to Streamlit, if you've seen that.
In those cases, sometimes you do want state, basically, right, like cyclic references.
So by default, Marimo actually checks for cycles.
If you have a cycle across cells, it, you know, politely tells you, like, hey, like, that's not really cool in Marimo.
Please break your cycle.
Here's some suggestions how to do that.
But if you're really insistent, then you can go to our docs and learn about the state object that we have that does let you get into some, like, runtime-based cell execution.
And you can update a state object and kind of in a React from 10D way, it'll run dependence of that state.
Okay.
Interesting.
Yeah, I guess that makes sense for apps.
You definitely need some sort of global state there.
Yeah, we – I think, like, we've seen that, like, sometimes our users will reach for state in call bits just because that's what they're used to, and, like, you know, that's what they maybe were required to use in, like, Jupyter, et cetera.
So we're trying to tell them, like, hey, in most cases, you actually don't need this.
Yeah, very cool.
So when you create a Jupyter notebook, you don't really create Python files.
You create the notebook files.
You create the notebook files, and those notebook files are JSON with both embedded cell execution bits, the code, but also the answers that go below.
That's why if you go to GitHub and you look at a notebook, you can instantly see what could be super expensive computation, but pictures and stuff there because it's, like, residual in the artifact, right?
Yeah.
You guys do Python files.
Do you have a way to, like, save that state in a sort of presentation style or something like that?
You know what I mean?
Is there, like, an associated state file?
Yeah.
So that's a really good question, and the answer is yes, but that is the biggest tradeoff, I think, of our file format.
So, like, a surprising number of people actually have come to us and told us, like, I didn't expect this, but they tell us the reason we decided to try Marima notebooks is because you say it is versionable with Git.
Like, that's, like, they're, like, that's the one reason I, especially, like, people in software and industry, and then they stay for all the other things.
So that's what the pure Python file format allows, in addition to, like, modularity, running it as a script.
For seeing outputs, yeah, they're not saved in the Python file.
So we have a couple of ways to get around that.
So one, like, you can export any Marima notebook to an IPython notebook file, actually.
So, like, you can set up this, like, we have a feature, like, automatic snapshotting.
You can automatically snapshot your notebook to, like, a parallel IPyMB file that's stored in a subdirectory of your notebook folder.
And so you can push that up or share that if you like.
When working locally, though, we actually have this cool feature that my co-finder, Miles, recently built.
Is that we actually, so when you're working, you're working with your notebook, the outputs are actually saved.
The representation of the outputs are saved in this, like, subdirectory, underscore, underscore, Marimo.
So that the next time you open the notebook, it just picks up those outputs and then, like, loads them into the browser so that you can see where you left off.
So.
I see.
So kind of like PyCache.
Yeah.
I would actually assume, given the name, but I haven't actually looked into PyCache too much.
Well, I mean, just in the sense that it's saved, like, right there in your project using that directory.
Oh, yes, yes, yes.
Yeah, the PyCache folder.
Exactly.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
And we have one other feature that another contributor, his name is Dylan, has been developing, which I think is, like, really cool,
which is along those same lines, but based on, like, Nick style caching.
So, like, it'll actually save, like, the Python objects themselves using a variety of different protocols.
And because we have the DAG, he can actually, like, you know, guarantee, like, the only guarantee, like, consistency of the cache.
But that means, like, not only are your outputs automatically loaded, like, also the variables are loaded.
So you can literally pick up where you left off.
Yeah, it sounds like some sweet SQLite could be in action there instead of just, you know, flat files or whatever.
Yeah.
Yeah, very cool.
So you talked about when the reactivity fires, it can sometimes be expensive to recompute the cells.
You know, sometimes they're super simple.
Sometimes they're, you know, train the machine learning model for two days.
Yeah.
Are there caching mechanisms?
You know, in a Python script, we've got functools.lrucache.
And then there's other things that are kind of cool, in-process caches, like PyMocha is kind of like the functool stuff, but way more flexible and so on.
And you could put those onto functions that then would have really interesting caching characteristics.
Like, if you're going to rerun it, but I've run it before with this other value, here's the same answer back, right?
Is there a way to set up that kind of caching or performance memoization type stuff?
Yeah, definitely.
And that same contributor, Dylan.
So he's implemented these and is continuing to build it out.
But we have, I guess, two options.
One is in-memory cache, which is basically the API is the same as functools.cache, but is designed to work in an iterative programming environment.
Like, if you use functools.cache naively, like, if a function, if a cell defining a function reruns, like, your cache gets busted, right?
So Mo.cache is a little smarter.
And, like, using the DAG can know whether or not it needs to bust the cache.
But to the user, it feels the same.
And then we also have a persistent cache, which is the one that I was kind of alluding to when I mentioned you can automatically pick up where you left off by loading objects from disk.
And so you can, like, put an entire cell in a context manager, like, with Mo.persistent cache.
It'll sort of do the right thing.
We've been talking about experimenting with, like, opting into, letting users opt into, like, global cell-wide caching, just, like, you know, automatically memorize cells or just have a UI element to do something like that.
But we haven't quite done that yet.
Yeah, I mean, it sounds real tricky for Jupyter.
But because you all know the inputs and the outputs, it's almost as if you could sort of drive a hidden LRU cache equivalent at the cell level.
You know what I mean?
That's exactly right.
Yeah.
I think, yeah, because we know the inputs and outputs, that's kind of how everything flows from a project.
You can think about projects like, if you turn a notebook into a data flow graph, what can you do?
And, yeah, caching is, smart caching is definitely one of them.
Yeah.
I mean, it's not a, I make a sound like, well, you know, the input's output, so it's fine.
But, you know, you could have the same data frame, but you could have added a column to the data frame.
And the LRU cache goes, is it the same pointer?
It is.
We're good to go.
It's like, well, yes.
However.
Yeah.
It's not the same.
You know, you almost got to, like, hash it or do something funky.
And, yeah.
Yeah.
It's not perfect.
Automatic sounds hard.
No.
Yeah.
Yeah, exactly.
That's why we haven't quite enabled it.
Yeah.
It is hard.
Side effects, too.
Network requests, all these things.
All right.
I have three more topics I want to cover before we run out of time here.
We may cover more, but three sort of required.
First one, because this is the one I'm going to forget most likely.
You are at Google, and then by way of going through a PhD, you now are not at Google creating this project, which is open source on GitHub.
And I don't see a pricing page at the top, but I do see it for enterprises.
Like, how is this sustaining itself?
Like, what's the business model?
So when we first started, right after my PhD, so that was early 2022, we were actually lucky enough to get funding from a national lab associated with Stanford, so the Stanford Linear Accelerator.
So I was talking with some scientists there, and we were talking about, I knew I wanted to make this thing.
And they were like, what are you up to?
And I was like, oh, well, I want to make this, like, notebook thing that, like, you know, fixes all notebooks, inspired by FudoJL.
And they were like, that's awesome.
We're scientists.
We use notebooks every day, and we're getting a little tired of reproducibility issues.
We want to make apps.
So they're like, we'll fund you to do this.
And so we...
Awesome.
So they kind of wrote you into one of their larger grants, something like that?
We got, like, a subcontract that, like, was covered by one of their grants, yeah.
So that wasn't enough for me and my co-founder, Miles, to work on it for two years, full-time alone.
And, like, I think it really let us polish the product and develop it.
And then mid-last year in July, one of our users is, like, one of our probably biggest power users, actually, is Anthony Goldblum,
who is the founder and former CEO of Kaggle.
Oh, nice.
Yeah.
Really into data science.
So he's been one of our biggest power users.
And at a certain point, he, last year, became, I guess, passionate enough about our project that he reached out to us and asked us,
hey, like, can this venture fund I'm part of, can we invest?
And so that was July of last year.
And so we raised money from them as well as from a bunch of, like, prominent angel investors, like Jeff Dean from Google,
Clem from Hugging Face, Lucas B.
Walter from Weights & Bias and others.
But so now our team is funded primarily through the venture funding.
Right now, our business model is build open source software based on our venture funding.
We do have plans for commercialization, but we're just not at a point where it makes sense to work on that right now.
But what I can promise is that Marimo will always be open source Apache 2.0 license.
We never plan to sell the notebook itself, but instead plan to work on complementary infrastructure.
Yeah, I can already think of two good ones.
Cool.
Yeah.
Awesome.
Okay.
The reason I ask is, you know, people always just want to know either how, what is kind of the success story of open source but sustainable, you know, as a full-time thing?
If they're buying into it, how likely is that going to stay open source or, like, what's the catch?
You know, that kind of stuff.
Yeah.
No, it's a good question.
I mean, we, honestly, I was, I think when we raised money, it actually, like, assuaged some of our users.
Like, because they were like, oh, like, Miles and Akshay are really cool.
They're building this really cool stuff, but, like, how are they paying rent?
And, like, so when we told them, like, yeah, we raised, you know, a few million dollars from Akshay Ventures, they were like, okay, that's great.
You deserve it.
Please continue building.
Nice.
Yeah.
Yeah, that's awesome.
All right.
Let's see.
Which one are we going to talk about next?
Not this one yet.
We'll talk about this because there's a nice comment from Amir out in the audience.
I love the new AI feature in Mario.
So you have an AI capability.
And then the other thing I want to talk about is, so we save some time for it, is publishing or running your reactive notebook as an app.
But let's talk AI first because we started the show that way.
I don't want to start to round it out that way, you know?
So we have, like, a few different ways that AI is, I guess, integrated into the project.
So one thing that we're trying really hard to do is, like, build, like, a modern editor, like, designed specifically for working with data.
And I think these days, modern means one of the requirements is you have AI stuff built in.
So you can, like, generate code with AI.
You can, like, even tell the – you can, like, tag, like, data frames and, like, tables that you have in memory and, like, give them as context, give their schemas as context to your assistant in, like, a cursor-like way.
We're also, like, experimenting with a new service right now, like, marimo.app.ai, where you can go type a little prompt, like, generate me a notebook that plots a 3D quadratic surface with Matplotlib.
Because I always forget how to do that.
And then it'll, you know, do its best to, in one shot, create that notebook for you.
And then you can play around with it.
And then you can either download it locally or share it out.
Yeah, very cool.
I'll put a link to the online AI feature that people can play with.
It looks really, really nice.
And it worked super quick when I asked it to go.
Now, one thing I want to talk about really quick now that I'm looking at this is you've got the code, but it's below the presentation of the result of the code.
Yeah.
So that is a stylistic choice, which is configurable.
Because people told us, many of them told us, we don't like this.
Please just put the output below.
But other people like it.
Okay.
You love it.
Yeah.
And so this is...
Okay.
Well, what is the point?
Is the point for me to see the code or the answer?
The point is to see the graph and the tables and then if I care, I'll look at the code.
So the way that I...
So I think I mentioned Pluto JL really briefly.
So Pluto JL is one of our biggest inspirations.
It's a Julia project, a reactive notebook.
Now, a lot of the great ideas that I think are great about Marimo came, honestly, very straight from Pluto.
And one thing that Fonz, like the creator of Pluto, you know, he likes to say is he said, code is...
The code of a cell is a caption for its output.
And that's the way you think about it.
And when you think about it that way, it makes a lot of sense.
But I think like Pluto and then Observable also both have outputs on top.
I don't know.
It's like...
I feel like if you...
It's like one of those heuristics you use.
You look at a notebook, output on top, it's a reactive notebook.
Otherwise, it's imperative.
I got you.
Gotcha.
Yeah.
I can see why you might not like it, but I like it.
So I think it's pretty cool.
Yeah.
And then this marmo.app.ai, once you create one of these, you have a shareable link that you
can hand it off to other people, right?
Yeah.
So you can open a new tab, which I think will...
So actually, all of this actually, interestingly enough, is running in our WebAssembly playground.
Yeah.
So there's that URL right there, which you can just share.
You can also do like the little...
There's a hamburger menu, which you can click on to get a permalink that's shorter.
But...
Right.
Yeah.
Honestly, we just built this Generate with AI feature like a little over a week ago.
And just curious to see what people use it for.
There's a lot more we could invest here.
I mean, you know, everyone talks about agents.
You can think about, oh, data science agent.
Like, but for now, we're just trying to one-shot thing and see how it lands with folks.
Yeah, sure.
Let's start with that.
Well, it looks really great.
And the UI is super nice.
So well done.
Appreciate it.
I'll pass that on to Miles.
He built this as a weeknight project.
You know, sometimes you just get inspired.
Just like, you know what?
I'm doing it.
I'm just taking two days off the regular work and I'm just doing this.
You know what I mean?
Yeah.
Yeah, definitely.
All right.
So the final thing I want to talk about, which you kind of hinted at a little bit there with the WebAssembly stuff, is I want to run my app.
So tell us about, as I'm fumbling around to find a place to show you.
Anyway, tell us about running the app.
Yeah, so there's a few different ways.
Like the sort of traditional way, if you have like a, you know, client server architecture.
So you have your notebook file.
It's called, I don't know, notebook.py.
It has some UI elements, et cetera.
It has some code.
You get an app, but just by default, you hide all the code.
Now you have text outputs UI elements.
You can think of that as an app.
So if you type marimorunnotebook.py at the command line, it'll start a web server that's serving your notebook in a read-only session that you can connect to, et cetera.
Can you do the widgets?
Like if it's read-only, can I like slide the widgets to like see it do stuff?
You know what I mean?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
So you can slide the widgets, see it do stuff.
If you just can't change the underlying Python code, like you can't like.
Got it.
But yes, that's true.
Shell exec, rm-rf.
Okay, let's go.
Yeah, yeah.
So that is not allowed.
And so that's the traditional way, client server.
But last year, we actually, I think it was last year, we added support for WebAssembly through the PyDive project, which is a port of CPython to WASM slash Unscriptum.
And so now you can actually take any Marima notebook.
And as long as you satisfy some constraints, which are documented on our website, you can export it as like static HTML and some assets and just throw it up on GitHub pages or server wherever you like.
And that's also what our online playground is powered by.
And we found this to be just like a really easy way to share notebooks, easy for folks in industry, easy for educators, and also just incredibly satisfying.
In our docs, like we have tons of little Marima notebooks iframed into like various like API pages, etc.
That just like lets you actually interact with the code as opposed to just reading it statically.
Yeah, that's nice.
That's super cool.
So it's pretty low effort, it sounds like.
And it's just, it's a lot of work to run a server and maintain it, especially if you're going to put it up there so other people can interact with it.
Then you've got to worry about abuse and all that kind of stuff.
If you can ship it as a static website, people are just abusing themselves if they mess with it anyway.
Exactly.
Like he, I had to give like huge props to like the Piedive maintainers.
They are amazing, really responsive and just building this labor of love.
And like, I don't know, they are really pushing the, yeah, pushing the needle on sort of the accessibility of Python.
Yeah, that's awesome.
Have you done anything with PyScript?
I haven't done anything with it.
I know of them.
So they also use Pyodide underneath the hood.
Yeah, they let you pick between Pyodide for more data science-y stuff and MicroPython for more faster stuff.
I am like pretty not educated about MicroPython.
I read about it, but I'd be curious on your take also, like on choosing one person.
Yeah, well, I think it's brilliant if you want like a front-end framework equivalent.
If you want PyView or PyReact or whatever, you don't need all the extras.
You kind of need the Python language and a little bit of extras and the ability to call APIs, right?
And so MicroPython is a super cut-down version that's built to run on like little tiny chips and self-contained systems on a chip type things.
So it's just way lighter.
It's 100K versus 10 megs or something like that, you know?
If it solves the problem, right?
If it gives you enough Python, I guess is the way to think of it, then it's a really cool option for front-end things.
I don't know that it works for you guys, right?
Because you want as much compatibility with like Matplotlib and Seaborn and all these things.
But if your goal is like, I want to replace the JavaScript language with the Python language, and I know I'm in a browser, so I'm willing to make concessions, I think it's a pretty good option.
Yeah, that makes sense.
Yeah, you're right.
We want max compatibility.
Like we have one demo where like you can load SKLearn, take PCA of these like images of numerical digits, put it in all Terraplot, select them, get it back as a data frame.
That's all running in the browser and like it's magical.
It's on your home screen.
People can watch the little embeddings explorer.
It's super cool.
It is very cool.
And it's honestly magical what PyDat has been able to enable.
Yeah.
I imagine it's just getting started.
I think so.
Yeah.
They're constantly shipping.
They just added support for Wasm GC.
So performance is increasing.
Exposed the bug in WebKit along the way.
Wow.
Okay.
That's good.
Yeah.
Cool.
All right.
Well, we're getting to the end of our time here.
So, you know, people are interested in this.
They might want to try it for themselves.
Maybe they're part of a science team or a data science team at a company.
What do you tell them if they're interested in Marimo and they want to check it out?
The easiest way, I think, is to just start running it locally.
And so our sort of source of truth is our GitHub repo.
So github.com, marimoteam slash marimo.
Or if it's easy to remember, our homepage is marimo.io, which links to our GitHub.
But then you can install from pip or uv or whatever your favorite package manager is and just sort of go to town.
If you really just, you know, don't have the ability to do that for whatever reason, you can go to marimo.new, which will create a blank Marimo notebook powered by WebAssembly in your browser.
It has links to various marimo tutorials, an example.
Notebooks.
Oh, we didn't even get to talk about the uv integration, which may be another time.
But that's another way that marimo makes notebooks reproducible down to the packages.
Oh, yeah.
UV is awesome.
UV is fantastic.
I'm a huge fan of uv and Charlie Marsh and team.
Yeah.
But github marimo.io and docs.marimo.io is what I would look at.
Awesome.
Well, thank you so much for being on the show.
Congratulations on the project.
It's really come a long way, it sounds like.
So it looks great.
Thanks, Michael.
I appreciate it.
It was a lot of fun to chat.
Yeah, you bet.
Bye.
you
Thank you.